# 2023-03-16 - vidgen update

So some time ago I created a tiny snippet that I called `vidgen`. Around that time I was working on a project that was targeting SBC-s to play video streams. All it could do was to play either local or streamed video with optional audio stream. The team at work wanted to show some message, can't recall why, but since the player could only play videos, they ended up generating the text message as a video and streamed that.

Since around the same time I had just finished a cross platform low level animation framework, I thought to write text all one would need need was rasterizing some bitmap fonts as images, then rendering the images as video frames, so not much work. Since the problem at work was already solved, I just created a proof of concept over the weekend, but seeing how easy it was it also got me thinking that I could instead rewrite a tiny shadertoy animation of mine in C and render that as a video stream.

A little while later I had my converted shadertoy animation using [ffplay](https://www.ffmpeg.org/ffplay.html) as its canvas.

Not long after, I was experimenting with 16 bit x86 asm and got acquainted with x87, so that got me wondering that even though I'm on mac, it's still x86 and maybe x87 still works despite of all the limitations this platform always seems to come up with, so all I gotta do is use inline asm and I should be able to call the fsin, fcos, fpatan functions and of course use the write syscall instead of printf and I'd have my tiny nostdlib player.

This was vidgen.

Forward to about a week ago. Since now I'm on an arm64 mac, of course while I could run my earlier x86_64 macho executable, I still won't be able to compile the thing, so this leaves me with no option but to update the code so it also runs on arm64 macs.

First things first, I used a macro to check what arch I'm on and 'crippled' all functions so they'd not do anything. I was expecting that this would just run an empty loop for me, but instead, the app just crashed on launch.

It would exit with the following message :

```shell
zsh: killed     ./obj/vidgen
```

This being a very helpful message, I also ran it through lldb and saw this :

```shell
error: Bad executable (or shared library)
```

Now this at least was something. It seemed to have an issue with the executable... but I had changed nothing from the earlier implementation and the compiler also didn't complain about a thing...

So it turned out that my earlier `-e _start -static` wouldn't suffice on the M1. The actual answer I found on some thread, where they explicitly stated that all executables had to link to at least `libSystem` on the M1.

To be honest I really hate the thought, but trying that I was able to confirm that indeed this was the issue, I just had to link with the System lib and my executable would properly run again.

Lots of stuff still left, since fsin/fcos for instance don't exist on the arm64 and I'm not that familiar with that arch in general, but I'm sure I'll have fun as always and look forward to learning about arm and the conventions that come with it.
