# 2022-12-18 - Magical buttons and where to find them

Couple of weeks ago a low prio bug was reported on a screen generated by a third party lib, showing weird buttons above the virtual keyboard, but only on iOS 16. After checking the demo app of the lib, we confirmed that it's a general issue of the app on iOS 16.

Steps I did :

* Checked for global settings of `UITextInputAssistantItem` - none
* Disabled all our `UIAppearance` settings - same issue
* Checked the doc of `UITextInputAssistantItem` and set a symbolic br on `-[UITextInputAssistantItem setLeadingBarButtonGroups:]` - it seemed to be setting the items it should

Decided to make bigger steps :

* Added a single initial VC to the app with a single `UITextField` - same issue
* Threw all calls out from the `UIAppDelegate` and left just an empty `application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:` - same issue
* Since one of the buttons was a language button, checked the `Info.plist` and threw everything out - same issue
* Created an empty app targeting iOS 16 - suspiciously, NO issue
* Threw everything out, only leaving all linked frameworks - same issue
* Started throwing the frameworks out one by one - after throwing out a third party lib, suddenly NO issue

So somehow this third party lib was doing something that affected the `UITextInputAssistantItem` on all textfields. To confirm, I added the lib to an empty app, the issue showed up again.

I figured they might be doing some [+[NSObject load]](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/objectivec/nsobject/1418815-load) initialization, but using lldb/radare to find methods of the sort I found nothing. The load page mentions [initializers in any framework](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/MacOSX/Conceptual/BPFrameworks/Tasks/InitializingFrameworks.html), which mentions the C `__attribute__((constructor))` syntax, so that got me wondering how I'd go about pausing lldb before even `main()` gets hit... not finding a way, decided to add such an initializer and dump the sections of the binary using lldb, to see what changed. A suspicious `__DATA_CONST.__mod_init_func` appeared of type 'data-ptrs', so using 'image lookup' in lldb to check the address stored at the address of mod_init_func, it was actually pointing me to my proof of concept static function.

Armed with this info I went back to the third party lib and :

* Checked for a `mod_init_func` section, then located the function's address stored at that address and crippled it (function epilogue right after function prologue) - same issue

Checked the size of this same section and it was actually 16 bytes (ie two 64 bit ptrs), so had to go back to my test app and added a second 'constructor' function. Now my `mod_init_func` section was also 16 bytes. After quickly confirming that it now contains the 2 pointers to my two 2 initializers, I went back to the third party lib :

* Found their second initializer, crippled that as well - same issue

Again I decided to brute force it a bit :

* After a bit of sidequest looking into the BOM format of its `Assets.car` I threw everything out from the lib - the lib no longer worked without the `Info.plist`, duh :D readded it - same issue

So then I had the idea that with a bit of luck, they're causing the problem in an objc call, so maybe if I could hijack `objc_msgSend` and check who's the destination of the message being sent, I could use this info to figure out what's going on.

I set a symbolic br on `objc_msgSend` and `si`-d far enough to the `jmp r11` call in `_objc_msgSend_uncached` (ah yes, I'm using [Rosetta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosetta_(software)) to run the x86 sim), then added a br action to run `image lookup -a $r11` and set the br to automatically continue. lldb shows a 'Summary' that reveals the binary that contains the address when using `lookup`, so I just filtered for the third party lib's name and waited for my catch.

As you can imagine this is excruciatingly slow, so do let me know if you know a better way, but after tapping in a textfield and waiting a bit, it showed that the lib was overriding the `-[UIBarButtonItem setHidden:]` method using objc category extension and this was the root of the problem - from iOS 16 this is an **existing** call on `UIBarButtonItem`.

Rewriting the name of their method in the lib by patching it using radare2 fixed the issue.

As additional bonus I found this page : [https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/qa/qa1908/_index.html](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/qa/qa1908/_index.html) . It discusses how to find out if you are overwriting SDK methods, but of course that would only help if you don't use any closed source third party libs and it's also runtime, so you'd have to reach all of the functions of your app to generate the full list in the console. To check the same with radare2 you could theoretically do : `izz~__OBJC_$_CATEGORY | sort -k 7` , but that's just an idea.

tl;dr - third party lib overrides iOS SDK method and this causes issues
 