# 2024-01-18 - Crash in iOS Simulator run through Rosetta

So due to using an arm64 arch mac and a third party library that's only available for the x86_64 Simulator I'm forced to run the app I'm working on in an x86 Simulator. This means [Rosetta 2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosetta_(software)#Rosetta_2). Recently we had a UI test that would crash rendering a view as an image :

```shell
(lldb) proc status

Process 61088 stopped

* thread #1, queue = 'com.apple.main-thread', stop reason = EXC_BAD_INSTRUCTION (code=EXC_I386_INVOP, subcode=0x0)

    frame #0: 0x0000000110d688b9 CoreGraphics`CGBlitInternal::cgsBufferIsConstantValue_internal::TestLimits<unsigned char, 64ul>::operator()(unsigned char const*, unsigned long, CGBlitInternal::cgsBufferIsConstantValue_internal::Limits const&) + 17
```

As you can see it's in CoreGraphics and the backtrace was long, but there's one particular frame that is interesting : 

```shell
frame #3: 0x00000001111012f2 CoreGraphics`is_image_alpha_opaque + 356
```

Googling for this issue I found that as a workaround if instead of using `UIGraphicsBeginImageContext(...)` one uses `UIGraphicsBeginImageContextWithOptions(...)` and creates an opaque CG context, it will work. Tested it, it worked, I pushed the change and continued work.

Some weeks later, while testing an unrelated function I saw the exact same crash, but this time it seemed to originate from the third party library. First I tried to find where they create the CG context in the hope that I could solve this problem by simply in-mem patching their lib, but their bt seems to pass through WebKit. They're generating a PDF, which uses WebKit internally. After some futile attempts at converting the html page into an opaque one (is this even possible?), I figured that maybe focusing on what exactly this signal means might get me closer to a workaround.

So back to frame #0 in the crash.

Disassembling the point where it crashes looks like this :

```shell
(lldb) dis -bp

CoreGraphics`CGBlitInternal::cgsBufferIsConstantValue_internal::TestLimits<unsigned char, 64ul>::operator():
->  0x110d688b9 <+17>: c4 e2 7d 5a 01     vbroadcasti128 ymm0, xmmword ptr [rcx]   ; ymm0 = mem[0,1,0,1] 
    0x110d688be <+22>: c4 e2 7d 5a 51 10  vbroadcasti128 ymm2, xmmword ptr [rcx + 0x10] ; ymm2 = mem[0,1,0,1] 
    0x110d688c4 <+28>: c5 f1 ef c9        vpxor  xmm1, xmm1, xmm1
    0x110d688c8 <+32>: c5 e5 76 db        vpcmpeqd ymm3, ymm3, ymm3
```

Wanting to move on, I figured I'd nop the `vbroadcasti128` calls out and see what happens, so I used `mem wr` to jot 0x90 11 times, then reran the app... but it crashed at +28 this time.

I'm more or less ok with x86 mnemonics, but I've never seen `vbroadcast*` used anywhere and since [https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/vpbroadcast](https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/vpbroadcast) makes reference to [AVX2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions), I wondered what the situation was with AVX and Rosetta and sure enough, the [Apple page](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/apple-silicon/about-the-rosetta-translation-environment) specifically mentions AVX/AVX2/AVX512 are unsupported.

So this in essence means, that as long as you use the iOS Simulator in x86_64 mode on an arm64 arch mac, you will most likely encounter this crash, since CG (when taking a snapshot of a view) appears to use it.

But then I still wondered.. will this mean that I can't move on from here? Well, as a last resort I tried one more thing.

```shell
(lldb) dis -n `is_image_alpha_opaque` -c 10

CoreGraphics`is_image_alpha_opaque:
    0x11110118e <+0>:  push   rbp
    0x11110118f <+1>:  mov    rbp, rsp
    0x111101192 <+4>:  push   r15
    0x111101194 <+6>:  push   r14
    0x111101196 <+8>:  push   r12
    0x111101198 <+10>: push   rbx
    0x111101199 <+11>: sub    rsp, 0x1e0
```

`is_image_alpha_opaque()` judging by its name would probably return a bool and then I guess the caller does something differently depending on what that bool is. In my case the image is fully opaque (a PDF), so I really couldn't care less what it returns, as long as it stops crashing and shows the document.

As you can see, it's a typical C ABI call, does the prologue at the beginning, so most likely the epilogue at the end. We know that the x86_64 C ABI returns vals in rax and the caller probably checks if it's zero and does something based on that.

Not very relevant, but here's the piece of code from the caller :

```shell
(lldb) dis -p

CoreGraphics`pdf_DrawImage:
->  0x11111b134 <+2057>: test   al, al
    0x11111b136 <+2059>: je     0x11111b17d               ; <+2130>
```

Point being is that it can be 0 or whatever, it won't check for 1 that I should carefully place in rax just to please the code.

So in light of this, I figured I'd try the following : I'll add a symbolic breakpoint for `is_image_alpha_opaque` and check where it stops (maybe someone can explain to me why the debugger sometimes stops past the prologue, other times it doesn't). After testing it, I saw that it stopped right on the first instruction. So then I wondered if I should bother with the prologue, so as to stack align, then jump to the epilogue, but it's unnecessary really and went for the simple solution of `ret`-ing as soon as it hits this symbol. Since I didn't want to wreck the lib itself by binary patching it, I only needed this so I could continue work, I added a breakpoint action to my br, `mem wr $pc 0xc3`. Running the app in debug mode again patched it in memory and the PDF finally appeared, just as before.

Yes, I know, ugly and why do I even bother, but the truth is that I doubt Apple will rewrite their CG call after explicitly stating that Rosetta won't support AVX. App devs should do the right thing and target the arm64-simulator directly and stop mucking about with Rosetta.
