# 2024-02-16 - A GDL90 Library

I recently became familiar with [GDL90](https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/air_traffic/technology/adsb/archival/GDL90_Public_ICD_RevA.PDF) and seeing that there was no complete cross-platform library, decided to create my own over the first weekend of 2024/02. The focus was on staying light weight, be portable, be easy to use and use no dynamic memory allocation, but rather delegate this responsibility to the users of the lib.

I no longer have access to a plethora of platforms, so might not get a chance to test it everywhere I'd like to, but it should at least compile on the major desktop platforms.

The library uses cmake and added a CLI example to show how it's meant to be used, as well as an example for wasm (JNI, Swift, etc might come later). The reason I chose wasm is because last time I worked with this platform was in 2015 and was curious how it had evolved. The rest of this post will be all about this experience.

## GDL90 Library + WASM

Back in 2015 I had a very positive experience with emscripten for asm.js and later for wasm. I had a cross platform app that had all its business logic in C++11 and it was running on Linux (x86, x86\_64, arm), Windows (XP, which even back then was a miracle to even be able to target), macOS (x86\_64), iOS (arm) and Android (x86, arm).

When the request came to see how much work it would be to port this to a [System On a Chip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_on_a_chip) (SoC) solution that ran on a TV, I figured I'd see what asm.js was all about. The TV had chromium and after a bit of fiddling I managed to compile the whole business logic to asm.js and ran it on the TV.  Most of the time spent was trying to get get asio to run in Workers, but couldn't, so I swapped the asio bit out for some JS code and now had all of the URL requests work as well and the program booted up into its main screen. The design of the program was 'headless' and since on desktop platforms I extended it with html5 and used a browser as its display (connected via websocket, employing a sort of custom display protocol), it wasn't much work getting it to work in another browser.

For the GDL90 wasm example I had a much much smaller project in mind - just processing some GDL90 packets with lib, then displaying the results.

My initial idea for passing this data was to use `embind`, which is a very complete implementation that really shortens your effort when sharing data between wasm and js. It only works with C++ classes however, so after writing a couple of C++ wrapper classes I wondered whether there'd be something for a more classless approach.

Since I wasn't pressed for time - it being just a pet project -, I wanted to learn more about the interaction between a wasm module and an external one (eg. JS running in a browser).

The gist of it is - you mark your chosen symbols in the code you compile to wasm `used` and mark any functions that will be created by the external module `extern`. As is tradition, they should also be marked `"C"`, otherwise you'll lose them to name mangling. In the linking phase you must also let the compiler know that the `extern` functions that don't exist during linking will be provided later (eg. when you load the wasm module from JS). To ensure I was doing things right I kept running `wasm-objdump -x gdl90.wasm` to see if my Imports list was importing things I didn't really need.

As it is with other languages you bind together, you can share memory, but the two languages require different memory layouts, so ultimately you'll be working with raw bytes and not with instances.

To access data in wasm memory from JS - and I'm sure there are zillions of other ways -, you can 

* use a `TypedArray`
* use a `DataView`
* use a method that returns the value

`TypedArray` access lets you iterate values of the same type in an easy way, so if you have, say, an array of floats, it's easy to go through them using a `Float32Array`.

`DataView` is slightly more complex, but it will also let you get any other supported type using `offset`s, so if you have a `struct` laid out in memory, then you can use a `DataView` to get the correct values and it will even read them in the endian way you request it to.

The problem starts with data structure alignment. This is because your compiler will optimize the struct for faster processing, which means that the offsets of your fields within the struct will vary.

One could use pragmas to get the structs packed to single bytes, but that would defeat the purpose we have packing in the first place. 

So a better solution would be outputting the offsets of fields, then writing JS by hand or one could even 'inject' generated JS code from wasm and `eval()` it, so that you end up with your JS code knowing the offsets during its run. To be honest, if I was to create something fast, I'd definitely go for this approach, but the offsets would be changed if in the future the struct changes. Or say, if WASM moves from 32 to 64 bits. I wanted something dynamic that would need less maintenance.

My first implementation was to 'propagate' information about the structures to JS, so that it would know what 'type' (`uint8` / `int32` / `char*` / etc) they are and what `offset` they're at (using `offsetof()`), within the data pointer sent back by the callbacks. I used `decltype()` to check the types of fields and would return a uint8\_t to represent the type in a single byte (think enums).

Doing this involved calling an imported function from wasm so as to pass the struct information to JS. The data passed consisted of a series of bytes - the GDL90 message identifier as its first byte and then the rest were type/offset pairs of its fields. I had fun with this approach, but didn't like having to store a lookup map so that I could map the types and offsets to read the values using `DataView` functions (`getUint8()`, etc). And of course I also had to get the types of each and every field in each and every struct. I wanted something a little less laborious.

So I scrapped this and ended up writing a tiny perl script (it's debatable whether I saved or wasted time this way) that processes the .h file, then generates C preprocessor macro calls that accept the `(class, field)` parameters and extend to exported getter functions for the struct fields.

The C++ macro isn't the most beautiful, but it does its job :

```
#define GDL90_SYNTHESIZE(CLASS,MEMBER) \
__attribute__((used)) auto CLASS ## _ ## MEMBER(CLASS * cl) -> decltype(+cl->MEMBER) { return cl->MEMBER; }
```

This way I could write `GDL90_SYNTHESIZE(GDL90TrafficReport, id)` to generate a getter function generated to retrieve the `id` field.
The weird `decltype(+field)` trick is to devolve the type and force the conversion of eg. `char[]` to `char*`, since the former would not be valid as a return type.

As a side note, code generation usually works for me because I can generate multiple types of code and test them out before I decide on going one way or another. If an approach fails or I dislike it for some reason, I just adjust the script and rerun. I liked the last solution the most and it also returns values directly consumable in JS, without endianness needing to also be taken into consideration. It felt the most natural, so it's what I'll go with for the example.

All in all it was a very enjoyable experiment and while I won't use any of it (have no projects with wasm), at least I learned something interesting.

Huge thanks to the wasm/emscripten community for making life so much easier when one actually does this for a living.
 