# 2024-03-08 - Random 'tricks'

Sometimes you're not aware that the way you work, the tools you use, the way you debug or fix issues may be unknown to others, either due to lack of interest or less familiarity with the options available. Since this week I was reminded of my constraint layout debugging technique, figured I'd share it here.

## Constraint painting

Every now and then when constraint layout issues arise, xcode will attempt to fix them by breaking a constraint and writes the following message in the console :

```
Make a symbolic breakpoint at UIViewAlertForUnsatisfiableConstraints to catch this in the debugger.
The methods in the UIConstraintBasedLayoutDebugging category on UIView listed in <UIKitCore/UIView.h> may also be helpful.
```

In addition to the helper category mentioned by the SDK, sometimes you just want to show issues in a visible, easy to detect way, which ever views are affected by the issue. When you add a `symbolic breakpoint` for `UIViewAlertForUnsatisfiableConstraints` the debugger breaks on the function :

```
UIKitCore`UIViewAlertForUnsatisfiableConstraints:
```

Unfortunately the SDK message doesn't explain what to do when the debugger breaks here and unless you know a bit of assembly at this point the best you can do is look back on the stack and see which call of yours triggered the layout.

If you do know a bit of assembly and the C ABI call conventions on the architecture you're on, you can start exploring stuff :

```shell
(lldb) po $rdi
<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fa9d786a870 V:[UITableView:0x7faa81a20800]-(50)-|   (active, names: '|':UIView:0x7faa4158e260 )>
```

The call above means `print the object passed as the first variable to the current function`, but the `$rdi` bit only applies to the x86 architecture, so if you're on arm, you'll probably use `$x0` instead.

At this point you'll practically see the same information you'd see without breaking here anyway, but it gives you some options at least. Now that you have the constraint instance, you could inspect it. To do this, the most important bit to understand is that `$rdi` is where the `obj-c instance` (which is a C pointer) sits, so knowing obj-c, you know you can send `messages` to it.

So you can either check its internals using the `private` calls that we normally use while debugging :

```
[instance _ivarDescription]
[instance _propertyDescription]
[instance _methodDescription]
[instance _shortMethodDescription]
```

Or you can just go to the [NSLayoutConstraint](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/nslayoutconstraint) docs and pick something you'll use.

Personally, I chose `firstItem` and `secondItem`, because those two should usually contain the affected views.

Initially what I used to do was issuing lldb commands to `paint` the views found in `firstItem` and `secondItem`, but later I decided to simply add a couple of breakpoint actions and enable `Automatically continue after evaluating actions` to make it more comfortable.

So if you develop either on an x86 or run Rosetta 2 x86 emulation in your sim, you can add the following two actions :

```
e (void)[[(id)$rdi firstItem] setBackgroundColor:UIColor.redColor]
```

and

```
e (void)[[(id)$rdi secondItem] setBackgroundColor:UIColor.redColor]
```

The two lldb commands above will then set the background color of affected views red, making it easy for you to spot constraint layout issues.

Note: As is the case with most lldb conditionals and lldb actions, this will severely impact the performance of your solution, so only enable it when you suspect foul.

## Dumping blobs in sqlite

If you either use CoreData or sqlite directly, sometimes you might want to inspect the blobs stored in it. The regular way to fetch data is using SQL `SELECT`, but for blobs you must use `writefile`.

Here's how you'd get a plist blob and inspect its contents :

```shell
echo ".output /dev/null\nSELECT writefile('/dev/stdout', ZEVENTDATA) FROM ZSENTEVENT WHERE Z_PK = 1;" | sqlite3 /private/tmp/SampleApp.sqlite | plutil -p -
```

## Snatching text from macOS apps

While writing this entry I wanted to copy something from the xcode interface, but of course one doesn't simply copy&paste from mordor, so here's an additional 'trick' in case you don't know it;

Xcode comes with some developer tools, some of which you may know (eg. Instruments, Simulator). One of them is the `Accessibility Inspector`, which lets you inspect elements on the screen, kinda like the web dev tools you use the alter the CSS of sites using annoying colors.

It's available through the `Xcode / Open Developer Tool` menu and you can point at an element and get the view hierarchy from an accessibility point of view. I usually use it to find out where an app showing on my screen resides.
