# 2024-03-03 - Extracting C/C++ struct/class fields

After writing a quick and dirty perl script to extract the fields from structs to synthesize property accessors (see the entry on GDL90), I wasn't too happy with the results, so was wondering if there was maybe a more accurate but still not too heavy way to do this.

Either this concerns no one or my google-fu needs an upgrade, but I couldn't find a proper writeup about this. However, at least I found some really good pointers.

### Using libclang and the AST

There's a really good article on the [libclang tutorial site](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/LibClang.html) that explains how one could traverse the AST and extract values by visiting each node. The idea is getting a translation unit and traversing the tree using cursors.

I wrote a quick snippet based on the tutorial sources and had the fields I wanted shortly after. This was great, I thought, but the problem I've not yet mentioned is that you'll need to have access to the dev version of llvm. On macos you can install it easily using `brew install llvm` fortunately, but it's not a dependency most would have lying around.

### Using clang extract api

Looking a bit more, I found that there's an `extract-api` parameter one can use to display information about the API from headers. This also seemed attracting, running `clang -extract-api -x c-header <header> -o -` will show you all the info it could extract in JSON format, so it should be easy to collect information from there.

### Using clang ast-dump

While reading up on extract-api, I also bumped into the `ast-dump` clang opt, which I liked even more. This one also has a JSON generation option `-ast-dump=json`, which also yields all you'd need to extract the fields from structs.

When ever I need to extract information from some serialized format, I opt for `xmllint`. It supports the powerful `xpath` expressions, so it's my go to swiss army knife. However, as it nowdays usually is, we have a JSON format and we need XML. For this reason, I have a tiny script based on [a comment](https://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=773713) by `ikegami` that I extended to make it work with stdin, so my usual 'trick' is to turn JSON-s into XML and use `xpath` to extract data. This was the resulting cmd, extracting the fields of my `GDL90TrafficReport` struct :

```
clang -Xclang -ast-dump=json -fsyntax-only gdl90.h | json2xml.pl | xmllint -xpath '//inner[@name="GDL90TrafficReport" and @tagUsed="struct"]/inner[@kind="FieldDecl"]/@name' - | cut -c 7- | tr -d '"'
```

As you see I couldn't figure out how to get just the text values of the attributes, so piped the rest through the usual suspects.

This oneliner unfortunately relies on a script that nobody has, so I wondered how it'd look w/o this dependency. I have several ~~scripting~~ interpreted languages installed, but in my personal experience one (ruby) is more concise for this sort of thing, so ended up with : 

```
clang -Xclang -ast-dump=json -fsyntax-only gdl90.h | ruby -rjson -e 'JSON.parse(STDIN.read)["inner"].select{|e|e["name"]=="GDL90TrafficReport" && e["tagUsed"]=="struct"}[0]["inner"].select{|e|e["kind"]=="FieldDecl"}.each{|e| puts e["name"]}'
```
